Visvesvaraya Technological University  
Belgaum, Karnataka - 590018  
 
A Project Phase – II Report  
On 
“Parkinson’s Fall Detection System using  
Machine Learning and IOT”  
 
Submitted in the partial fulfilment of the requirements for the award of the Degree of  
BACHELOR OF ENGINEERING  
In 
INFORMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING  
 
 
Submitted by  
 
Akhila H                                  (1DS19IS012)   
Aneesh Chandra Dixith         (1DS19IS016)   
Avanthi   Anand                      (1DS19IS026)   
Karthik Shivanand                (1DS19IS050 ) 
 
Under the Guidance of  
Dr. Vaidehi M  
 
Associate Prof, Dept. of ISE  
 
2022 -2023  
 
DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING  
DAYANANDA SAGAR COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING  
SHAVIGE MALLESHWARA HILLS, KUMARASWAMY LAYOUT, BANGALORE -78 
 

DAYANANDA SAGAR COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING  
Shavige Malleshwara Hills, Kumaraswamy Layout  
Bangalore -560078  
Department of Information Science and Engineering  
 
2022 -2023  
 
Certificate  
 
This is to certify that the Project Work entitled “Parkinson’s Fall Detection System using 
Machine Learning and IOT” is a bonafide work carried out by  Akhila H (1DS19IS012), Aneesh 
Chandra Dixith (1DS19IS016), Avanthi Anand (1DS19IS026) and Karthik Shivana nd 
(1DS19IS050) , in partial fulfilment for  the 8th semester  of Bachelor  of Engineering  in Information  
Science  & Engineering  of the Visvesvaraya  Technological  University,  Belgaum  during  the year 
2022 -2023.  The Project  phase – II report  has been  approved  as it satisfies  the academic  requirements  
prescribed  for the Bachelor of Engineering degree.  
 
 
 
 
 
Signature of Guide  Signature of HOD  Signature of Principal  
[Dr. Vaidehi M]  [Dr. Rajeshwari J]  [Dr. B G Prasad]  
 
 
Name of  the Examiners  Signature with  Date  
 
1 
 
 
      2

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
 
It is a great pleasure for us to acknowledge the assistance and support of a large number of  
individuals who have been responsible for the successful completion of this project.  
We take this opportunity  to express  our sincere  gratitude  to Dayananda  Sagar  
College           of Engineering  for having  provided  us with a great  opportunity  to pursue  our 
Bachelor  Degree  in this institution.  
In particular  we would  like to thank  Dr. B G Prasad,  Principal,  Dayananda  
Sagar  College of Engineering for his constant encouragement and advice.  
Special thanks to Dr. Rajeshwari J, Professor and HOD, Department of Information 
Science &  Engineering, Dayananda Sagar College of Engineering for his moti vation and 
invaluable support  well through the development of this project.  
We are highly indebted to our internal guide Dr. Vaidehi M , Associate Professor , 
Department of  Information Science & Engineering, Dayananda Sagar College of 
Engineering for her con stant  support and guidance. She has been a great source of 
encouragement throughout the course of  this project.  
 
Finally,  we gratefully  acknowledge  the support  of our families,  friends  during  the 
completion of the project.  
 
 
Akhila  H                                     (1DS19IS012)   
Aneesh Chandra Dixith            (1DS19IS016)   
Avanthi Anand                          (1DS19IS026)   
Karthik Shivanand                         (1DS19IS050)  
  
 
 
ABSTRACT  
 
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is one of the long-term regressive disorders of the central nervous 
system that mainly affects the nervous system in humans due to which there is the recurrent 
occurrence of falls which might even lead to death or put them in a serious situation. For 
solving this issue,  we have proposed an idea that detects patient fall and reports to the 
caretaker or family member utilizing message/call/Alarm thereby avoiding deaths. Our 
work focuses on developing and apply the wearable fall -detection system for Parkinson’s 
disease long -suffers formed on a Wi -Fi module. Patient falls were precisely traced on the 
outcome of an accelerometer, oximeter, and pressure sensors which were sent to the cloud 
via NodeMCU -ESP32. Furthermore, Node MCU ESP32 is planned for attaining smooth 
communicat ion between the fall detection device and the system for obtaining and 
processing the data anytime and anywhere until we have a Wi -Fi connection. In 
consequence, the cloud will perform the calculations based on SVM which is the Support 
Vector Machine. In t urn, it sends the fall detection outcomes to the MIT application. This 
WFDS turns out to be the best among the existing models in terms of fall detection 
sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy. The fall of direction in PD can be performed 
accurately based on the fall detection algorithm at the receiver end. The preliminary 
outcomes show that the wearable fall -detection system attains eighty -. eight percent 
accuracy in identifying the patient’s fall.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS  
1. INTRODUCTION…………………………………………….. 1 
1.1. Overview  1 
1.2. Problem Statement                                                                                                                  4 
1.3. Objectives                                                                                                                                4 
1.4. Motivation                                                                                                                               5 
2. LITERATURE  SURVEY……………………………………... 6 
3. REQUIREMENTS… ………………………………………… .13 
3.1 Functional Requirements                                                                                                       13 
3.2 Non-Functional Requirements                                                                                               14  
3.3 Software Requirements                                                                                                          15 
3.4 Hardware Requirements                                                                                                         17  
4. SYSTEM ANALYSIS & DESIGN…………………………... 24 
4.1 Analysis                                                                                                                                  24 
4.2 System Design                                                                                                                        24 
4.2.1 System Architecture Diagram                                                                                             26 
4.2.1.1.  Data Flow Diagram                                                                                                         28  
4.2.1.2.  Flowchart                                                                                                                          30 
 
4.2.1.3  Use Case Diagram                                                                                               33 
4.2.1.4  Sequence Diagram  35 
 
5. IMPLEMENTATION………………………………………… 38 
5.1 Introduction                                                                                                                 38 
5.2 Implementation                                                                                                           38 
5.3 Overview of System Implementation                                                                         39 
5.3.1 System implementation                                                                                            39 
5.3.1.1  Programing Language s-Pytho n and C                                                                    41 
5.3.2 Libraries Used                                                                                                           42
 
6. PSEUDO COD E………………………………………………... 44 
 
7. TESTING………………………………………………………. 46 
7.1: Test cases                                                                                                             46 
 
8. RESULTS…………………………………………………….... 50 
8.1 Results                                                                                                             50 
9. CONC LUSION & FUTURE SCOPE………………………… 55    
 10. REFERENCES……………………………………………….. 56
LIST OF FIGURE S 
 
 
 
Sl. No.  
 
 Figure No  
 
 Page No.  
 
 
     1 Figure 3.3.2.1.  Firebase Cloud  16 
     2 Figure 3.4.1.1 . ADXL337  18 
 
      3 Figure 3.4.1.2. ESP32            19 
   
     4 Figure 3.4.1.3. MAX30100                       20 
   
     5 Figure 3.4.1.4. NEO -6M GPS                      21 
   
     6 Figure 3.4.1.5. OLED              21 
   
     7 Figure 3.4.1.6. BUZZER              22 
   
        8                                  Figure 3.4.1.7.  TILT SENSOR                                             23 
  
 
         9                                     Figure 3.4.1.8.  BMP 180                                                    23 
 
 
 
        10               Figure 4.2.1(a). System Architecture Diagram of the I OT Model          26 
 
 
 
      
  Sl. No.                                                       Figure no                                                    Page No.  
 
         11                Figure 4.2.1(b ). System Architecture Diagram of the ML Model            27 
 
 
     12                   Figure 4.2.1.1(a).  Data Flow Diagram of the ML Model                      28 
 
 
     13                    Figure 4.2.1.1(b ). Data Flow Diagram of the  IOT Model                     29 
 
 
     14                         Figure 4.2.1.2(a).  Flow Chart of the IOT Model                             30 
 
 
      15                       Figure 4.2.1.2(b).  Flow Chart of the ML Model                                32 
 
 
      16                        Figure 4.2.1.3(a).  Use Case Diagram of the ML Model                   33 
 
 
      17                       Figure 4.2.1.3(b). Use Case Diagram of t he IOT Model                   33 
 
  
      18                          Figure 4.2.1.4(a ). Sequence Diagram of the IOT Model                35 
 
 
      19                         Figure 4.2.1.4(b).  Sequence Diagram of the  ML Model                36 
 
 
      20                                          Figure 8.1. Parkinson Belt                                              50 
 
 
      21                                      Figure 8.2. Display from Firebase Clo ud                           50 
 
  Sl. No.                                                       Figure no                                                    Page No.  
 
     22                               Figure 8.3. Display from MIT Application Screen                     51 
 
 
     23                                         Figure 8.4. Decision tree Accuracy                                    52 
 
 
     24                                          Figure 8.5. XG Boost Accuracy                                        52 
 
 
     25                                  Figure 8.6. Logistic Regression Accuracy                                53 
 
 
     26                                Figure 8.7. Support Vector Machine Ac curacy                          53 
 
 
     27                                  Figure 8.8. Gaussian  Naïve Bayes Accur acy                           54 
 
 
     28                                      Figure 8.9. Random fore st Accuracy                                    54 
 
 
     29                              Figure 8.10. Accuracy comparison  of the Algorithms                 55 
 
 
     30                                       Figure 8.11 User Front End UI                                            55 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     1 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE    
  CHAPTER 1  
INTRODUCTION  
1.1 Overview:  
Falls are the first main reason for injury for elderly people. It is estimated that 4% of the 
population over the age of 60 are suffering from Parkinson’s disease and were diagnosed before 
and at the age of 50. Overall, as many as 1 million Americans are living with Parkinson’s disease, 
and around 60,000 Americans are identifying with Parkinson’s every year. Therefore, a fall 
detection system for the elderly is a technology that is essential for the aging society. Most people 
will fall often and repeatedly because of Parkinson’s disease. The consequences of falls can be 
devastating, far -reaching, and costly. People with Parkinso n’s disease most commonly 
experience a reduction in the body balance and its symptoms are tremors, the rigidity of muscles, 
pain in limbs, Gait impairment, freezing of gait, slow moments, stumbling walking, depression, 
and visual and cognitive impairment. Recurrent Falls in Parkinson’s disease (PD) and seizures 
can cause injuries like rupturing of bones, reducing the quality of life and may lead to death. 
Some of the fall detection systems which were already introduced are having some constraints 
and provoc ation like fall detection accuracy, the direction of fall, and needless alarms. As people 
start aging, and as humans work constantly the human body starts to decline. This implies that 
the daily tasks or efforts that people are doing every day can lower th eir physical condition which 
leads to unexpected falls.  
 
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a central nervous system disorder that mainly affects the kinetic 
system in humans. PD affects thousands of individuals worldwide and is expected to affect about 
8.7 to 9. 3 million people in 2030. Common early symptoms of PD are related to abnormal 
movements of the human body. PD begins by way of the damage or reduction of brain cells 
responsible for the production of dopamine, a neurotransmitter responsible for helping the  brain 
perform its essential tasks such as controlling kinetic functions and possibly other functions 
related to mood and feelings. About 68% of PD patients fall, with around 50% suffering from 
repeated falls.  
 
 
Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     2 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   In general, recurrent falls occur when a pa tient falls more than once in a given period (usually 
6–12 months). Allen et al.[2] reported that around 70% of PD patients who experience falls 
suffer from recurrent falls. A survey of 100 people with PD showed that 13% of recorded fall 
accidents in PD oc curred more than once per week and even multiple times a day [2,11]. 
Goodwin et al. [6] discussed PD patients who suffered a fall 577 times in 20 weeks, which is 
approximately equivalent to 1,500 falls in a year. These results indicate the need to monitor the 
fall events of PD patients continuously at their homes or health centers to notify their member 
families or caregivers as soon as possible of the occurrence by detecting early signs of fall 
detection [6]. Consequently, fall -detection systems offer a si gnificant service by decreasing the 
subsequent negative impacts of risk falls such as sudden mortality due to cardiac arrest; stroke; 
hip fracture, trauma, or injury.  
 
Falls in PD occur when the production of dopamine in the brain decreases by about 75% to  80%. 
The lack of dopamine equilibrium in the brain can lead to a brain malfunction. Many symptoms 
have a direct impact on fall -related events in PD, including tremors (spontaneous shaking in the 
body such as in the arms and legs), muscle rigidity, gait im pairment, gait freezing, slow 
movement, depression, and fall events as shown in. The symptoms of PD are very episodic and, 
as such, cannot be wholly analyzed or recorded at the doctor’s clinic.  
 
Normally, most people might think that an unexpected fall is  very threatening because elders 
will be affected very badly. Thailand is one of the aging societies as it is having 36 percent of 
people who are treated in the emergency room and it's been increasing every year. Parkinson’s 
disease affects thousands of in dividuals globally and is anticipated to influence about 8.7 to 9.3 
million people in 2030. Parkinson’s disease begins to damage and starts to deplete the brain cells 
responsible for the production of dopamine, the neurotransmitter responsible for serving the 
brain carrying out its necessary action such as controlling kinetic functions and possibly other 
functions related to the frame of mind and feelings.  
 
Around 68 percent of Parkinson’s disease patients fall, with around 50 percent hurting from 
recurrent  falls. When the production of dopamine in brain cells reduces to 75 to 80 percent the 
patients who are suffering from Parkinson’s disease will start to fall. It leads to brain breakdown 
due to the deficiency of dopamine content in the brain. Common abnorm al movements of the 
Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     3 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   body and the other symptoms are Tremor, Gait impairment, freezing of gait, Slow movement, 
Stumble walking, Depression, Rigidity muscle, Pain of limbs, visual and cognitive impairments 
due to which fall accident will be happened and resu lts in injures like a broken bone and 
sometimes it may lead to death by the Cardiac arrest and stroke are the early symptoms of 
Parkinson’s Patients. Normally, repeated falls count if the patient falls more than once in a given 
interval usually 6 -12 months . 
 
About 13% is recorded from the observation of 100 patients that they suffer one fall per week or 
even twice or multiple times a week. By research, Patients suffer 577 falls in 20 weeks and which 
comes to around 1,500 times in a year. Through these recor ds, the information for the caretakers 
and the family members is to be sent as soon as they come across the early symptoms of 
Parkinson’s disease to prevent the fall. In consequence, fall -detection systems offer an 
outstanding solution by decreasing the fo llowing negative impacts of risk falls, such as Gait 
impairment, Freezing of gait, Slow movement, stumbling walking, Depression, Rigidity muscle, 
Pain of limbs, and visual and cognitive impairments.  
 
As mentioned above, fall detection research applied eit her a single sensor or fusion by multiple 
sensors. The methods of collecting data are typically divided into four main categories, namely 
individual wearable sensors, individual visual sensors, individual ambient sensors, and data 
fusion by sensor networks . Whilst some literature groups visual and ambient sensors together 
we treat them as two diff erent categories in this report due to visual sensors becoming more 
prominent as a detection method with the advent of depth cameras (RGBD), A fall -detection 
syste m consists of a sensing component and an algorithm that detects falls based on the measured 
sensor readings. The sensing components can be attached to the human body, such as in the case 
of accelerometers and gyroscopes, or not —for example, cameras and inf rared devices. Two main 
methods of algorithms are used for detecting fall events: a simple threshold method a nd the 
machine learning method.  
 
For instance, three -axial acceleration is utilized to detect a fall. An acceleration exceeding the 
threshold indicates a fall event. In the machine learning method, cases of different types of fall 
events and activities of daily living (ADL) are trained an d tested by a learning algorithm under 
an evaluation algorithm. Machine learning methods include support vector machines and hidden 
Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     4 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   Markov models. Unfortunately, machine learning approaches can be difficult to implement 
because of their heavy computational  and resource requirements.  
 
In addition to fall detection, the direction of the fall accident is also valuable information because 
it can indicate freezing and gait impairment in patients with PD. Many studies have attempted 
to introduce fall direction. However, the computation of the direction of fall accidents remains 
largely inaccurate.  
 
In this report , a wearable fall -detection system (WFDS) for use by elderly PD patients is 
proposed. This WFDS automatically detects fall events and assists with the im mediate 
communication of such adverse accidents wirelessly to medical staff or family to draw medical 
assistance as soon as possible by sending alerts. In addition, this assistance is valuable to promote 
the sense of security of elderly patients, especiall y those living alone, and reduce their fear of 
falling.  
 
1.2 Problem Statement  
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a central nervous system disorder that mainly affects the kinetic 
system in humans due to which there is a recurrent occurrence of falls which might even  lead to 
death or put them in a serious condition. In order to solve this problem, we have proposed a 
system that detects a patient’s fall and reports it to the caretaker or family member by means of 
a message/call/alarm thereby avoiding deaths.  
 
1.3 Objectives  
To develop an intelligent device for detecting falls using the pattern of Parkinson’s patients.  To 
develop a system which detects falls and also sends real time data such as body temperature, 
spo2, blood pressure and location of patient to caret akers.  
 
 
Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     5 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   1.4 Motivation  
Recurrent falls can cause serious injury and even death due to cardiac arrest and stroke. In 
general, recurrent falls occur when a patient falls more than once in a given period (usually 6 –
12 months).  
 
These results indicate the need to  monitor the fall events of Parkinson's Disease patients 
continuously at their homes or health centers to notify their member families or caregivers as 
soon as possible of the occurrence by detecting early signs of fall detection.  
 
With advancements in tec hnology and the prevalence of audio collecting devices in daily lives, 
reliable models that can translate this audio data into a diagnostic tool for healthcare 
professionals would potentially provide diagnoses that are cheaper and more accurate.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     6 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   CHAPTER 2  
    LITERATURE SURVEY  
 
The below -given category summarizes the references from various reports  with similar goals 
and objectives. Several previous works have been done in the area of monitoring of the elderly 
without any aid from humans. Based on the different types of sensors used, there are different 
techniques used to monitor the fall detection. The techniques used can be broadly classified into 
1) Wearable sensors approach; 2) vision -based approaches; 3) acoustic, vibrational, and othe r 
ambiance sensor -based approaches. Below, we provide a synopsis of the systems using vision -
based and non -vision sensors.  
 
Wearable sensor -based methods depend on accelerometer and gyroscope sensors which are 
mounted on the subject’s body. This system relies on the wearable embedded sensors to detect  
the motion and location of patients. The advantage of this method includes the ease of installation, 
cost efficiency, and its simple operation. Disadvantages: Most fall events cannot be detected, and 
the system will be restricted to limited coverage areas.  
 
Ambient sensor -based methods depend on capturing the vibrational data of the subject such as 
shaking signals or audio signals, that are generated during fall events. This system involves 
external sensors  such as infrared, acoustic, pressure, and vibrational sensors. These sensors can 
detect the nature of everything in the sensor arrangement environment and the distance between 
the subject and sensor location has a direct effect on fall detection accuracy.  Thus, the system 
tends to generate false alarms. The main disadvantage of this method is that it cannot cover all 
fall direction angles, the detection area is limited to a distance of about 12m only, and the system 
has a high cost. Vision -based fall -detec tion systems use a computer or a multi -set of video 
cameras embedded into the monitoring environment of elderly patients. Data acquisition relies 
on analyzing body posture changes or three -dimensional head motion However, the performance  
of the system is r educed when the patient is blocked by an object (e.g., furniture). In this case, 
the system can not analyze and process the ongoing patient activity, rendering it useless. In 
addition, cameras or videos are limited to use in specific areas, do not guarante e privacy, and are 
expensive. Several methods have previously been proposed for the fall detection problem.  
Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     7 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   Ying -Wen Bai, et al.[3] proposed a threshold -based method to detect falls using a three -axis 
accelerometer sensor  data gained from a smartphone. Their algorithm had five states, each 
checked by some thresholds on acceleration magnitude, to decide whether a fall has occurred or 
not. 
 
Stefano Abbate, et al. [4] defined some index metrics such as Impact Duration, Maximum Peak, 
Peak Duration, etc., and obt ained values for them in 3 -second windows. Their method detects 
falls by using a feed -forward neural network with one hidden layer and seven neurons on it. HE 
Jian and HU Chen [5] detected backward falls only, by using accelerometer and gyroscope 
sensors a nd a KNN algorithm. Their features were the sum of 20 samples for acceleration and 
gyroscope magnitude in each window. Finally, backward falls are classified into 3 other moves 
(walking –turning –walking, sitting down -standing up, squatting -standing). Ryan M . Gibson, et 
al. [6] used a multi -comparator classifier for detecting falls. They used ANN, KNN, RBF, PPCA, 
and LDA classifiers. The acceleration data obtained from the Shimmer device and they used 
discrete wavelet transform (DWT) was applied to the time d omain tri -axial acceleration vector 
to determine the wavelet approximation coefficients for the equivalent acceleration components.  
 
Bruno Andò et al. [7] presented a novel threshold -based multi -sensor data fusion approach by 
using combined data from an accelerometer and a gyroscope. To create features, they used 
maximum cross -correlation between recorded signals. Our method resembles [4] in using a 
neural network, though the MLF network acts differently from conventional neural networks. 
Finally, the pro posed method uses features such as: mean, standard deviation, min, max of the 
magnitude of acceleration, and each x, y, and z and another feature that is calculated by some 
formula, and the considered states include nine daily activity and four fall moveme nts. 
 
Yu et al. [29] proposed a computer -vision fall detection system based on posture recognition by 
the projection histogram method. The proposed system employs a single camera for monitoring 
at home. Experimental results showed that the system has a fal l detection accuracy of 97.08% 
and a false detection rate of 0.8%. Disadvantages: Limited detection area preventing the body 
from being tracked outside the range of vision cameras and the external sensing of the camera 
entails a high cost.  
 
Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     8 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   Chen et al. [32] implemented a video -based human fall -detection system that uses a single  
camera and a computer This fall -detection system is based on a combination of human shape  
variations and skeleton features. The sensitivity and false alarm rates of  the proposed system are 
90.9% and 6.25%, respectively. Disadvantages: Most fall events cannot be detected, the system 
has a limited coverage area, and only three types of fall events and three ADLs have been tested. 
Ambient sensor –based methods rely on ca pturing the vibrational data, such as shaking signals 
or audio signals, that are generated during fall events. Ambient sensor –based systems involve 
external sensors, such as infrared, acoustic, pressure, and vibration sensors. However, these 
sensors can de tect the nature of everything in the sensor deployment environment and the 
distance between the subject and sensor location has a direct effect on fall detection accuracy 
Thus, the system tends to generate false alarms. Indoor environments should contain m ultiple 
sensors to achieve high accuracy, thereby increasing effort and costs. The main shortcomings of  
this strategy are a low accuracy for fall identification (<95%). Previous researchers such as 
Ariani et al [34] proposed a dual -technology sensor (DTS) based on wire -less ambient sensors. 
This modality uses a simulated environment to validate the potential possibility of using wireless  
ambient sensors. The proposed DTS system consists of the hybrid sensor [pyro -electric infrared  
(PIR) and microwave] as a motion -detection method and pressure mats. Two DTS detectors are 
placed at each location; one detector tracks the upper half of the room, and the other tracks the 
lower half. Experimental results showed that the accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity of th e 
proposed fall algorithm are 89.33%, 100.00%, and 77.14%, respectively. Disadvantages: The 
system is that it cannot cover all fall direction angles, the detection area is limited to a distance 
of about 12 m only, and the system has a high cost.  
 
Liu et al . [35] introduced an elderly healthcare system for fall detection. The system consists of 
three sensitive PIR sensors that are placed at different heights on a wall. The system detects the 
fall event by responding to temperature changes produced by human m otion. The optical flow 
technique was also applied to capture and analyze the direction of motion caused by the head, 
lower limbs, and upper limbs, respectively. The system achieved 92.5% sensitivity and 93.7% 
specificity. Advantages: Low operational and m anufacturing costs. Disadvantage: The PIR 
sensor has a limited coverage area.  Giuseppe and Pietro [28] presented a fall -detection system 
called the ‘‘m -Health system,” which  consists of an accelerometer sensor used to monitor the 
subject’s activity and pos ture and an integrated device including an ECG sensor with a breathing 
Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     9 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   rate sensor. The accelerometer sensor monitors the patient’s posture and activity and then sends 
samples wirelessly to the mobile device via Bluetooth. Experimental results showed that the 
system has 92% accuracy, 86% sensitivity, and 96% specificity. Disadvantages: The system has 
a complex computational algorithm and the types of test cases of fall events used in evaluating 
the system were not mentioned.  
 
Panicker et al. [27] developed a fall -detection system by monitoring parameters in real time. The  
developed system includes a wearable wrist body sensor unit and involves a PC with the Android 
operating system. A body sensor unit consists of an accelerometer sensor, a blood pressure 
sensor, a temperature sensor, a pulse rate sensor, and a Bluetooth module. Experimental results 
showed that this fall -detection system could achieve 80% accuracy, 87.5% sensitivity, and 75% 
specificity. Advantages: The wrist sensor node is suitable for obese bodies with large arms and 
the device can be comfortably worn because it does not require one to remove clothing while  
obtaining measurements. Disadvantages: Low accuracy, data classification of test cases was 
obtained only from young healthy subjects, and  the authors did not mention the number and 
types of test cases used in evaluating the system.  
 
Ren et al. [26] designed an energy -efficient prototype of a fall -detection system called Asgard, 
which consists of a triaxial accelerometer sensor, a microcontr oller, and a Zigbee module. Test 
cases were carried out by 10 - to 30 -year-old subjects (seven males and three females). Two AA 
batteries (1500 mAh) are used to power up the sensor node. Experimental results of 
comprehensive evaluations showed that Asger ac hieved 93.21% accuracy. Advantages:  
 Low cost  nd optimal placement of the sensor node (waist). Disadvantages: Low accuracy; the 
system has  a long detection time of about 12s, and data calcification was tested only in young 
subjects. A wearable device using  a single tri -axial accelerometer was developed by Wu et al. in 
[22]. The wearable device is placed on the user’s waist. The device detects falls based on 
acceleration analysis and sends a short message with the user’s location data to caregivers. The 
system also gives the user a chance to  withdraw an alarm.  
 
No special mounting is required for this system as the algorithm does not need the axes of the 
accelerometer to be fixed strictly. The proposed system achieved 97.1% sensitivity and 98.3% 
Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     10 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   specificity. The system may trigger false alarms as the normal activity of resting has a similar 
rotation as falling.  
 
Lim et al. [23] developed a system in which the fall feature parameters are calculated from a 
single tri -axial accelerometer. The parameters are first  applied to a simple threshold method and 
then the detected falls are applied to a Hidden Markov Model (HMM) to distinguish between 
falls and fall -like events. The system achieved 99.5% accuracy, 99.17% sensitivity, and 99.69% 
specificity when the ASVM = 2 .5g and θ = 55° were the threshold values for the simple threshold 
method and the parameter θ was applied to the Hidden Markov Model. The system conserves 
computing effort and resources by applying only the detected fall events to the HMM.  
 
An unobtrusive smartphone -based fall detection system was proposed by Aguiar et al. in [24]. 
The system continuously screens the accelerometer data of the smartphone when the smartphone  
is carried in the user’s belt or pocket. From the acceleration vector output of the a ccelerometer 
of the smartphone, a total of 14 different signal components (x, y, z projections, magnitude value, 
and angles with x, y, and z axes of the phone) are computed and passed through a Butterworth 
digital filter by the system. The system then uses  a decision tree to retrieve information regarding  
the most significant features and thresholds. This information is used in a state machine 
algorithm to detect the fall and send SMS and email notifications containing the user’s location 
to the caregivers and emergency services. The sensitivity and specificity of the system are close 
to 97% and 99% for both usage positions (belt or pocket). Future works might incorporate the 
use of gyroscopes for detecting the rotation and barometer for calculating altitude  in the system. 
As the system continuously screens the accelerometer data, battery usage of the smartphone is a 
concern.  
 
Li et al. [25] developed a waist -mounted device using TelosW mote with an accelerometer as 
the detector and the Neyman -Pearson detection framework as the classifier. The accelerometer 
in the  systems periodically samples the acceleration of the person and compares the data with a 
predefined threshold. If the data exceeds the threshold, an alert message is delivered to the base 
station using an 802.15.4/Zigbee network. The base station can then forward the message to the 
emergency services and caregivers using mobile communication networks . 
Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     11 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   Laura et al [26] developed a footwear -based fall detection system employing an accelerometer 
sensor and Force Sensing Resistors (FSR) situated in the sole of the footwear. The processing 
device, a Raspberry Pi, encased in a box, is connected to the sensors via long wires and worn at 
the waist like a belt. The threshold -based algorithm achieved a 97 .1% maximum accuracy and 
90% accuracy with a FAR (False Alarm Rate) of 0.  
 
The Simbad project [11] uses infrared sensors, making people’s detection and feature extraction 
easier. Fall detection is performed by using a neural network classifying a vertical velocity 
descriptor. Nevertheless, the requirement of fast movements recognition may lead to a sensitivity  
to noise tending to send false alarms.  
 
The Ubisense project [12] proposes to classify human poses by computing the orientation of each 
detected blob . However, no motion modeling and recognition are proposed for analyzing the 
pose sequences.  
 
Nait-Charif and McKenna [13] propose a method for automatically extracting motion trajectory 
and providing human -readable summarization of activity and detection of unusual inactivity. 
Tracking is performed with an omnidirectional camera by means of a particle filter estimating 
ellipse parameters describing human posture. Fall is detected as a deviation from usual activity. 
However, no information about the pose of  the person or his motion dynamic is taken into 
account.  
 
Töreyin et al. [14] suggest a method for fall detection by making use of an HMM using both 
audio and video. For the vision part of the approach, the aspect ratio of the bounding box of the 
moving re gion detected with a standard camera is analyzed by the motion model. More precisely,  
its wavelet transform is used as an input feature for the HMM. Using conjointly video and audio  
cues seems to be well -founded. Defining HMM states in the frequency domain  is interesting         
because it makes explicit use of motion features. However, the viewpoint robustness of the 
bounding box aspect ratio feature for discriminating standing and lying postures is not discussed, 
and the evaluation is mainly limited to fr ontal views. It is clear, for example, that the aspect ratio 
Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     12 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   observed in the image corresponding to a standing posture will sensitively vary between a 
vertically -oriented optical axis and a horizontally oriented one. The problem remains for the 
wavelet coe fficients, making the motion recognition efficiency only limited to some specific 
viewpoint configurations.  
 
Recently, Cucchiara et al. [15] propose a multi -view solution dedicated to fall detection. They 
make use of histogram projections to classify the s ilhouette between the standing and lying poses. 
Interestingly, warping people’s silhouettes between the different views makes it possible to 
detect partial occlusions, and compensate for them. An HMM -based approach is proposed for  
Overview of the proposed multi -view fall detection system. making the pose recognition more 
robust. Howev er, the motion is only taken into account at very small time scales, to disambiguate 
the pose estimation, and no explicit modeling of the motion in terms of pose sequence is 
proposed.
Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     13 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   CHAPTER 3  
    REQUIREMENTS  
3.1 Functional Requirements  
 
1. Fall Detection: The system should be able to accurately detect falls or sudden movements 
indicative of a fall in individuals with Parkinson's disease.  
2. Sensor Integration: Integration with IO T devices and s ensors (such as accelerometers,    
gyroscopes, or wearable device s) to capture relevant data related to movement, posture, and 
activity.  
3. Real -time Monitoring:  The ability to continuously monitor the user's movements and 
provide real -time alerts or notifications to caregivers or emergency contacts in the event of a fa ll 
or potential fall.  
4. Machine Learning Algorithms:  Utilization of machine learning techniques to analyze the 
voice data input and predict the presence of the disease. The system should be trained on a 
dataset of voice inputs specific to Parkinson's dise ase. 
5. Personalized Thresholds : The system should allow customization of fall detection 
thresholds to accommodate individual variations and account for the specific symptoms and 
characteristics of each person with Parkinson's disease.  
6. Ambient Intellige nce: Integration with smart home technologies or environmental sensors 
to provide additional context and insights into the user's activities and surroundings, aiding in 
the detection and prevention of falls.  
7. Localization:  The system should be able to id entify the location of the user accurately, either 
through GPS or indoor localization techniques, to facilitate timely response and assistance in 
case of a fall.  
8. Data Privacy and Security:  Implementation of robust security measures to protect the 
person al health data of individuals with Parkinson's disease, including encryption, access 
control, and compliance with privacy regulations.  
 
 
Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     14 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   9. User -Friendly Interface:  A user -friendly interface for both individuals with Parkinson's 
disease and caregivers, allowing easy setup, configuration, and access to relevant information 
or reports.  
 10. Data Logging and Analysis: The system should have the capability to store and a nalyze 
historical data related to falls and movements, enabling long -term monitoring, trend analysis, 
and potential insights for healthcare professionals.  
 11. Integration with Healthcare Providers:  Provision for integration with existing healthcare 
system s or electronic health records, facilitating seamless communication and information 
sharing between the Parkinson's fall detection system and healthcare professionals.  
 
3.2 Non-Functional Requirements  
 
1. Reliability:  The system should be highly reliable and accurate in detecting falls and 
distinguishing them from other movements or activities.  
 2. Accuracy:  The system should have a high level of accuracy in detecting falls while 
minimizing false positives and false ne gatives.  
 3. Real -time monitoring : The system should provide real -time monitoring capabilities to detect 
falls and trigger timely alerts or notifications.  
 4. Scalability: The system should be scalable to handle a large number of users and devices 
simultaneously.  
 5. Security:  The system should ensure the security and privacy of user data, as it may involve 
personal health information. It should implement appropriate encryption, access controls, and 
data protection measures.  
6. Compatibility:  The sy stem should be compatible with a variety of IoT devices, sensors, and 
wearables commonly used by Parkinson's patients, ensuring seamless integration and data 
exchange.  
7. Usability:  The system should have a user -friendly interface and be easy to set up and  use, 
considering the potential physical limitations of Parkinson's patients.  
8. Energy efficiency:  The system should optimize energy consumption to pro long the      battery 
life of IO T devices or wearables used in the fall detection system.  
Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     15 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   9. Adaptabilit y: The system should be adaptable to different environments and situations,    
accounting for variations in user behavior, mobility, and location.  
10. Performance:  The system should have efficient processing capabilities, handling real -time 
data streams fr om multiple sensors and delivering prompt fall detection and alerts.  
 11. Robustness: The system should be resilient to network interruptions, device failures, or 
environmental factors that may affect the detection accuracy.  
 12. Maintenance and support:  The system should be designed for ease of maintenance, 
including regular updates, bug fixes, and technical support for users.  
 13. Compliance:  The system should comply with relevant legal and regulatory requirements, 
such as data protection laws and healthc are industry standards.  
14. Interoperability : The system should support interoperability with other healthcare systems 
or platforms, allowing seamless integration of fall detection data into broader health monitoring 
and management systems.  
 15. Ethical co nsiderations:  The system should address ethical considerations, such as 
transparency in data usage, consent for data collection, and adherence to ethical guidelines for 
AI and machine learning applications.  
 
 
3.3 Software Requirements  
1. ARDUINO IDE  
   
 The Arduino Integrated Development Environment (IDE) is a software platform specifically 
designed for programming and developing projects using Arduino boards. It provides a user -
friendly interface and a set of tools that simplify the process of writing, compi ling, and uploading 
code to Arduino microcontrollers.  
 
The Arduino IDE is built on the Processing programming language and is open -source, allowing 
developers to access and modify its source code. It is available for various operating systems 
like Windows,  mac OS, and Linux, making it widely accessible to users  across different 
platforms. When working with the Arduino IDE, users write their code in the Arduino 
programming language, which is based on the C and C++ languages. The IDE includes a text 
editor w ith syntax highlighting and auto -completion features that aid in writing code efficiently. 
Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     16 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   It also provides a library manager that offers a vast collection of pre -written code modules, called 
libraries, to extend the functionality of Arduino boards. The ID E supports a straightforward 
compilation process, where the user's code is transformed into machine -readable instructions 
called machine code. It automatically handles the compilation and linking steps required to 
convert the written code into a format tha t can be executed by the Arduino microcontroller.  
 
2. FIREBASE CLOUD  
 
Firebase is a backend platform for building Web, Android and IOS applications. It offers real 
time database, different APIs, multiple authentication types and hosting platform. Firebase can  
power your app's backend, including data storage, user authentication, static hosting, and more. 
Focus on creating extraordinary user experiences. We will take care of the rest. Build cross -
platform native mobile and web apps with our Android, iOS, and Ja vaScript SDKs. You can 
also connect Firebase to your existing backend using our server -side libraries or our REST API.  
 
Firebase Features  
i.  Real-time Database − Firebase supports JSON data and all users connected to it receive 
live updates after every cha nge.  
ii.  Authentication – We can use anonymous, password or different social authentications.  
iii.  Hosting – The applications can be deployed over secured connections.  
               
Figure 3.3.2.1 .  Firebase Cloud  
 
 
 

Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     17 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   3. MIT APPLICATION  
MIT App Inventor is a web application integrated development environment originally provided  
by Google, and now maintained by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). It uses a 
graphical user interface (GUI) very similar to the programming languages Scratch (programming  
language) and the Star Logo, which allows users to drag and drop visual objects to create an 
application that can run on android devices, while a App -Inventor Companion (The program that 
allows the app to run and debug on) that works on iOS running device s are still under 
development. In creating App Inventor, Google drew upon significant prior research in 
educational computing, and work done within  Google  on online development environments.  
 
3.4 Hardware Requirements  
 
1. ADXL337  
 
The ADXL337 is a three -axis accelerometer sensor manufactured by Analog Devices. This 
sensor is designed to measure acceleration in three perpendicular axes: X, Y, and Z. It operates 
on the principle of microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) technology, where tiny integrated 
structure s sense and convert physical motion into electrical signals. The ADXL337 provides 
accurate and reliable acceleration data, making it suitable for various applications such as 
robotics, motion detection, and tilt sensing . The ADXL337 sensor consists of a ti ny silicon 
structure that contains capacitive plates and a suspended proof mass. When subjected to 
acceleration, the proof mass moves, causing a change in capacitance. This change is converted 
into electrical signals that can be processed by a microcontrol ler or other electronic devices. 
The sensor offers a measurement range of ±3g, meaning it can detect accelerations up to three 
times the acceleration due to gravity.  
 
One of the key features of the ADXL337 is its small size, which enables easy integration into 
compact electronic systems. It operates on low power, making it suitable for battery -powered 
applications. The sensor provides analog output signals proportional to the measured 
accelerations, which can be easily interfaced with analog -to-digital conv erters (ADCs) or 
analog signal processing circuits.  
 
Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     18 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   The ADXL337 is commonly used in projects that require accurate acceleration measurements 
and motion detection. For example, in robotics, it can be employed to monitor the orientation 
and movement of robo tic arms or platforms. In motion detection systems, the sensor can be 
utilized to trigger events based on specific movements or gestures. It can also be used in tilt 
sensing applications to detect the inclination of an object or device.  
 
Overall, the ADXL3 37 three -axis accelerometer offers a reliable and precise solution for 
measuring acceleration in three dimensions. Its small size, low power consumption, and analog 
output make it versatile and suitable for a wide range of applications where monitoring and  
analysis of physical motion are crucial.  
  
                               
Figure  3.4.1.1 ADXL337  
 
2. ESP32  
 
ESP32 is a single 2.4 GHz Wi -Fi-and-Bluetooth combo chip designed with the TSM ultra -low 
power 40 nm technology. It is designed to achieve the best power and RF performance, 
showing robustness, versatility and reliability in a wide variety of applications and power 
scenarios. TheESP32 series of chips includes ESP32 -D0WD -V3, ESP32 -D0WDQ6 -V3, 
ESP32 -D0WD, ESP32 - D0WDQ6, ESP32 -D2WD, ESP32 -S0WD, and ESP32 -U4WDH, 
among which, ESP32 -D0WD -V3, ESP32 -D0WDQ6 -V3, and ESP32 -U4WDH are based on 
ECO V3 wafer. ESP32 is designed for mobile,  wearable electro nics, and Internet -of-Things 
(IOT) applications. It features all the state -of-the-art characteristics of low -power chips, 
including fine -grained clock gating, multiple power modes and dynamic power scaling.  For 
instance, in a low -power IO T sensor hub application scenario, ESP32 is woken up periodically 
and only when a specified condition is detected. Low -duty cycle is used to minimize the amount 

Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     19 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   of energy that the chip expends. The output of the power amplifier is also adjustable, thus 
contributing to an optimal trade -off between communication range, data rate and power 
consumption.  
 
                                               
Figure 3.4.1.2 ESP32  
 
ESP32 is capable of functioning reliably in industrial environments, with an operating 
temperature ranging from –40°C to +125°C. Powered by advanced calibration circuitries, 
ESP32 can dynamically remove external circuit imperfections and adapt to changes in external 
conditions. Engineered for mobile devi ces, wearable electronics and IO T applications, ESP32 
achieves ultralow power consumption with a combination of several types of proprietary 
software. ESP32 also includes state-of-the-art features, such as fine -grained clock gating, 
various power modes and dynamic power scaling. ESP32 is highly integrated with in -built 
antenna switches, RF antenna , power amplifier, low noise receives amplifier, filters, and power 
management  modules. ESP32 adds priceless functionality and versatility to your applications 
with minimal Printed Circuit Board(PCB) requirements. ESP32 can perform as a complete 
standalone system or as a slave device to a host MCU, reducing communication stack overh ead 
on the main application processor. ESP32 can interface with other systems to provide Wi -Fi and 
Bluetooth functionality through its SPI / SDIOorI2C / UART interfaces.  
 

Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     20 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   3. MAX30100  
A pulse oximeter is basically a device which can measure your pulse and oxyg en saturation in 
your blood. Usually, this sensor consists of two LEDs emitting light: one in red spectrum(650nm) 
and the other one in Infrared (950nm).  This sensor is placed on your finger or earlobe, essentially 
anywhere where the skin is not too thick s o both light frequencies can easily penetrate the tissue. 
Once both are shined through your finger for example, the absorption is measure with a 
photodiode. And depending on the amount of oxygen you have in your blood the ratio between 
the absorbed red lig ht and IR led will be different. oxygen concentration can be measured by 
calculating the ratio between absorbed light from  IRLED  and Red LED.  
     
Figure 3.4.1.3 MAX30100  
 
4. NEO -6M GPS  
The u -box NEO -6M GPS engine on these modules is quite a good one, and it  also has high 
sensitivity for indoor applications. Furthermore, there’s one MS621FE -compatible 
rechargeable battery for backup and EEPROM for storing configuration settings. The module 
works well with a DC  input in the 3.3 - to 5-V range. The GPS modules a re based on the u -box 
NEO -6M GPS engine. The type number of the NEO -6M is NEO -6M-0-001, and its 
ROM/FLASH version is ROM 7.0.3 (PCN reference UBX -TN-11047 - 1). The NEO -6M 
module includes one configurable UART interface for serial communication, but the def ault 
UART (TTL) baud rate here is 9,600. Because the GPS signal is right -hand circular polarized 
(RHCP), The NEO -6M module includes one configurable UART interface for serial 
communication, but the default UART (TTL) baud rate here is 9,600. Because the GP S signal 
is right -hand circular polarized (RHCP), the style of the GPS antenna will be different from the 
common whip antennas used for linear polarized signals. The most popular antenna type is the 
patch antenna.  

Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     21 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE        
 
Figure 3.4.1.4  NEO -6M GPS 
 
5. OLED  
OLEDs are simple solid -state devices (more of an LED) comprised of very thin films of organic 
compounds in the electro -luminescent layer. These organic compounds have a special property 
of creating light when electricity is applied to it.  The organic compoun ds are designed to be in 
between two electrodes. Out of these one of three electrodes should be transparent. The result 
is a very bright and crispy display with power consumption lesser than the usual LCD and LED.  
               
Figure 3.4.1.5  OLED  
 
 
 
 

Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     22 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   6. BUZZER  
Buzzers can be both fun and useful in electric circuits. We’ll use them a lot in Make Crate 
projects, so let’s take a look at what is going on inside a buzzer to produce sound. The buzzer 
consists of an outside case with two pins to attach it to pow er and ground. Inside is a piezo 
element, which consists of a central ceramic disc surrounded by a metal (often bronze) 
vibration disc. When current is applied to the buzzer it causes the ceramic disk to contract or 
expand. This then causes the surrounding  disc To vibrate.  That’s the sound that you hear . 
                 
Figure 3.4.1.6  BUZZER  
 
7. TILT SENSOR  
Tilt sensors allow you to detect orientation or inclination. They are small, inexpensive, low  
power and easy -to-use. If used properly, they will not wear  out. Their simplicity makes them 
popular for toys, gadgets and appliances. Sometimes they are referred to as "mercury switches", 
"tilt switches" or "rolling ball sensors" for obvious reasons. They are usually made by a cavity 
of some sort (cylindrical is popular, although not always) and a conductive free mass inside, 
such as a blob of mercury or rolling ball. One end of the cavity has two conductive elements 
(poles). When the sensor is oriented so that that end is downwards, the mass rolls onto the poles 
and shorts them, acting as a switch throw.  
 
Tilt switches used to be made exclusively of mercury, but are rarer now since they are 
recognized as being extremely toxic. The benefit of mercury is that the blob is dense enough 
that it doesn’t bounce and so th e switch is not susceptible to vibrations. On the other hand, ball 
type sensors are easy to make, wont shatter, and pose no risk of pollution. While not as precise 
or flexible as a full accelerometer, tilt switches can detect motion or orientation simply. Another 
benefit to them is that the big ones can switch power on their own.   

Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     23 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE      
                                           Figure 3.4.1.7  TILT SENSOR  
 
8.  BMP180  
The BMP180 is the next generation of sensors from Bosch, and replaces the BMP085. you 
can use our BMP085 tutorial and any example code/libraries as a drop -in replacement. The 
XLCR pin is not physically present on the BMP180 so if you need to know that data  is ready 
you will need to query the I2C bus. This board is 5V compliant - a 3.3V regulator and a i2c 
level shifter circuit is included so you can use this sensor safely with 5V logic and power. The 
BMP180 is a piezo resistive  sensor that detects pressure.  Piezo resistive  sensors are made up 
of a semiconducting material (usually silicon) that changes resistance when a mechanical force 
like atmospheric pressure is applied. The BMP180 measures both pressure and temperature, 
because temperature changes the den sity of gasses like air. At higher temperatures, air is not 
as dense and heavy, so  it applies less pressure on the sensor. At lower temperatures, air is 
denser and weighs more, so it exerts more pressure on the sensor. The sensor uses real -time 
temperatur e measurements to compensate the pressure readings for changes in air density. The 
BMP180 outputs an uncompensated temperature (UT) value and an uncompensated pressure 
(UP) value. The temperature measurement is taken first, followed by a pressure measureme nt.  
 
 
Figure 3.4.1.8 BMP180  

Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     24 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   CHAPTER 4  
         SYSTEM ANALYSIS & DESIGN  
4.1 Analysis  
The Parkinson's fall detection system utilizing the Internet of Things (IoT) and machine learning 
(ML) is a groundbreaking solution designed to enhance the safety and well-being of individuals 
affected by Parkinson's disease. By integrating IoT sensors into the environment, such as 
wearable devices or motion sensors, real -time data can be collected to monitor the movements 
and activities of patients. Leveraging ML algor ithms, this data can be analyzed to identify 
patterns indicative of a fall event. The system employs advanced ML techniques to distinguish 
between normal movements and falls, reducing false alarms and ensuring accurate detection. 
Once a fall is detected, t he system triggers automated notifications or alerts to caregivers, 
enabling prompt assistance and medical intervention. This innovative fusion of IoT and ML 
holds immense potential in revolutionizing the management and care of Parkinson's patients by 
providing reliable fall detection, enhancing their safety, and promoting timely support.  
 
4.2 System Design  
As IoT -based devices have become more popular in the medical field, many wearable sensors 
have been developed for the WFDS. Hence, these advancements bring more possibilities to help 
caretakers in protecting their elders by improving the outcome of the wearable sensor by using 
ESP32 for the fall detection system. The system consists of an accelerometer node and receiving 
node. The oximeter sensor is implement ed using the MAX30100, it measures the pulse and 
oxygen saturation levels in the patient's blood. The buzzer which is used acts as an alarm for 
notifying the caretakers about the fallen patient. OLED displays the decision  made.  This 
proposed system has two  main parts, the sensor -board, and the monitoring system. The first part 
is the sensor board or fall detection device. It consists of an accelerometer sensor and the ESP32. 
Triaxial accelerometer (ADXL337) with a three -axis magnetic field. It detects the k inematic 
signal from the daily activities of the patient. The ESP32 used acts as a coordinator to send the 
kinematic signal detected to Firebase Cloud.  
 
 
Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     25 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   Here ESP32 is a microcontroller that calculates the fall detection with risk level measurement 
by comp aring it with the threshold values. ESP32 is a device that is designed for IoT and 
embedded systems. Low cost, low power, and abilities of Wi -Fi are the main factors for selecting 
ESP32 in the required prototype. The second major part is the real -time data  analytic and data 
storage system, which is used to record the kinematic signal to Cloud storage. This part alone 
acts as a controller. It consists of Firebase Cloud, acting as real -time storage which helps in 
making a pr ototype, scaling the I OT-based proj ect, and managing data with cloud computing 
technology. The Firebase Cloud used here acts as a platform to process the kinematic signal 
received from the ESP32. Firebase Cloud monitors and graphs the data. Hence, the fall detection 
data will be sent to the  web server. The respective hospital or caretakers can monitor the data 
signal and diagnose medical information related to fall events on their own.  
 
Firebase is the backend platform for building Android, web, and IOS applications. It supports a 
real-time database, various APIs, many authentication types, and a hosting platform. It can power 
the app's backend, including user authentication, data storage, and static hosting. It builds cross -
platform native mobile, and web apps with IOS, android, and JavaScri pt SDKs. It also connects 
Firebase to the existing backend using server -side libraries or REST API authentication. Users 
can use anonymous, passwords or different social authentications. The Advantages are - It is 
simple to use and user -friendly. Data is r eal-time, which means that any change will 
automatically be updated to connected clients. Firebase Cloud always offers a simple control 
dashboard.  
  
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     26 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   4.2.1 System Architecture Diagram  
 
 
 
Figure 4.2.1 (a) System Architecture Diagram of the  IOT Model  
 
The Parkinson' s fall detection system using IO T employs a comprehensive architecture that 
combines various interconnected components to enable efficient monitoring and prompt 
response to falls. At its core is a network of wearable sensors worn by Parkinson's patients, 
capturing real -time data related to their movements, balance, and posture. These sensors 
transmit the collected information to a gateway device, such as a smartphone or a dedicated 
IoT hub, which acts as a central hub for data processing. Once a fall is detected, an alert is 
generated and  transmitted to a cloud -based server, where it is processed and sent to a caregiver 
or healthcare professional via a mobile application or web interface. Additionally, the system 
may integrate with existing home automation devices or emergency services, en abling rapid 

Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     27 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   response and assistance during fall emergencies. This architecture ensures continuous 
monitoring and timely intervention, enhancing the safety and well -being of Parkinson's 
patients.  
     
       
 
 
        Figure 4.2.1(b) System Architecture D iagram of the ML Model  
 
The Data Collection component involves capturing voice recordings from individuals, 
particularly focusing on speech patterns, vocal characteristics, and any abnormalities that may 
be associated with Parkinson's disease. These voice recordings can be obtained through 
various means, such as dedicated voice recording devices or smartphone applications.  Then 
the pre processed data is classified into training and testing data, Once the model is trained, it 
can be utilized for Parkinson's Disease Detection using voice data. New voice recordings can 
be input into the model, and the ML algorithm predicts whether the individual exhi bits signs 
of Parkinson's disease based on the learned patterns and features from the training data.The 
Detection Result Output component provides the final outcome of the system's analysis. It 

Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     28 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   may present the results as a binary classification (indicative  or non -indicative of Parkinson's 
disease) or provide a probability score reflecting the likelihood of Parkinson's disease presence 
based on the voice data analysis.  
 
 
4.2.1.1  Data Flow Diagram  
 
Figure 4.2.1.1(a) . Data Flow Diagram of the ML Model.  
 
i. Parkinson dataset is taken and loaded.  
ii. The data is preprocessed in order to fill the missing values and convert strings to 
numeric data etc. in the dataset etc to increase the accuracy.  
iii. The model is built using machine learning algorithms like Linear Reg ression, XGB 
Regressor and Random Forest Regressor.  
iv.  The model is trained with the preprocessed data.  
v. The model is tested and accuracy is calculated for different ML algorithms.  
vi.  The algorithm with best accuracy is finalized and that model will predict Parkinson 
disease based on user given new data from front end.  
 
 
 

Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     29 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE    
Figure 4.2.1.1(b) Data Flow Diagram of the IO T Model.  
 
1. External Entities:  
i.  Patients: Individuals with Parkinson's disease who wear IoT devices for fall detection.  
ii. Caregivers: Individuals responsible for monitoring the patients and receiving fall 
notifications.  
2. IoT Devices:  
i. Fall Detection Sensor: An IO T device worn by the patient that captures motion data and 
detects falls.  
ii. Data Transmitter: Transmits the sensor data wirelessly to the system.  
3. Data Collection:  
i. Sensor Data Receiver: Receives the sensor data from the IoT devices.  
4. Fall Detection and Notification:  
i. Fall Detection Module: Utilizes the ML model to analyze preprocessed data in real -time and 
detect falls.  
ii. Fall Notification System: Alerts the caregivers about fall incidents through various means.  
5. Caregiver Response:  
i. Caregiver Monitoring Interface: An interface accessible by caregivers to view fall 
notifications and patient status.  
ii. Caregiver Acknowledgement: Caregivers can acknowledge the fall notification, ensuring 
they are aware of the incident.  

Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     30 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   4.2.1.2  Flow Chart  
 
Figure 4.2.1.2 (a) Flow Chart of the IO T Model.  
The total acceleration as well as the rotation angle value are calculated by the threshold. The 
generated  results are compared to the thresholds that were set using the collected data As a 
result, the multidimensional fall detection technique is used to provide effective threshold 
values. The system's fall detection mechanism is depicted as a flowchart. This method creates 
three triggers for collecting events that occur throughout the system's  operation. The angle of 
human movement is calculated using the first trigger, and the angle of human movement is 
calculated using additional triggers. The flowchart illu strated in Fig depicts the system's fall 
detection method. This technique establishes three triggers for gathering events that occur 
throughout the system's operation. The first trigger is used to calculate the human movement 
angle, while the remaining tri ggers are utilized to determine the amplitude of the accelerated 
movement. The acceleration magnitude is given by , 
 𝑨𝑴 =(𝑹𝒐𝒍𝒍𝟐+𝑯𝒆𝒂𝒅𝒊𝒏𝒈𝟐+𝑷𝒊𝒕𝒄𝒉𝟐)𝟏/𝟐 … equation 1  
The Roll is the angle rotation around the x -axis that describes the human body's sideslip angle 

Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     31 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   to the right and left. The pitch indicates the angle of rotation around the y -axis, which depicts 
the forward and backward motion of the body; the heading indic ates the angle of rotation 
around the z -axis, which depicts the right and left corners of the human body. The rotational 
angle, or angular Kinematics of movement, is given by the equation as  
𝒂∗𝒃=|𝒂|.|𝒃|𝐜𝐨𝐬 𝜽… equation  2 
The arranged angle is calculate d by equation as illustrated below,  
𝜽=𝒄𝒐𝒔−𝟏|𝒂∗𝒃||𝒂||𝒃| … equation  3 
Where a (ax, ay, az) represents the device's rapid value, b(bx, by, bz) represents the elderly's 
reference position when using the device vertically, and is the angle rotation between  the 
vectors a and b. The system will calculate the rotation of the angle altered value once it obtains 
the accelerated magnitude (AM) value. The fall detection algorithm compares the generated 
values to the preset degree of rotation angle and threshold va lues to check the fall detection 
result. If the degree of rotation angle exceeds 60 - 100, it means the body has lost its balance, 
resulting in an unintentional fall.  
 
The estimated AM value will be compared to a predetermined threshold value in this 
algor ithm. If the computed accelerated magnitude exceeds the lower threshold, the algorithm 
will activate trigger 1 to signify that no fall event has been detected because the danger of a 
fall is too low, or the elderly are engaged in activities that are not li kely to result in a fall. The 
method will trigger if the calculated accelerated magnitude exceeds the upper threshold, 
indicating that a fall event has been identified. It shows that a genuine fall event has occurred. 
It will then send a notification to th e caretaker, indicating that a rescue is required. It shows 
that a genuine fall event has occurred. It will then send a notification to the caretaker, 
indicating that a rescue is required.  
 
 
 
 
 
Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     32 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE    
 
 
Figure 4.2.1.2(b) Flow Chart of the ML Model.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     33 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   4.2.1.3  Use Case Diagram  
 
 
     Figure 4.2.1.3(a) Use Case diagram of ML model.  
 
● The system will collect the data from the user.  
● The system will analyze the collected data.  
●  The system will do pre -processing and model building.  
● The built model is evaluated and tested for accuracy.  
● The user will finalize the model with best accuracy.  
● The user will give new data to the system and the model will predict results and display.  
 
 
     Figure 4.2.1.3(b) Use Case diagram of IOT model.  

Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     34 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   1. Users: The diagram would typically include three main types of users:  
i. Parkinson's Patients: Individuals who have Parkinson's disease and wear the IoT devices 
that detect falls and collect data.  
2. IOT Devices: These are physical devices worn by Parkinson's pa tients that capture data related 
to falls. These devices usually include sensors (e.g., accelerometers, gyroscopes) to detect 
motion and changes in orientation. The devices may also have wireless communication 
capabilities to transmit data to the system.  
3. Fall Detection System: This represents the core of the solution and incorporates the IoT 
devices, ML algorithms, and data processing capabilities. It consists of the following 
components:  
i. Data Collection: Responsible for collecting data from the IoT devices, including movement 
patterns and sensor readings.  
ii. Fall Detection Algorithm: Utilizes ML techniques to analyze the collected data and identify 
patterns associated with falls. This component classifies the data and triggers alerts when 
a fall is dete cted.  
iii. Alert Generation: Once a fall is detected, this component generates alerts and notifications 
to inform the appropriate users (caregivers and healthcare professionals) about the event.  
iv. Data Storage: This component is responsible for securely storing t he collected data for future 
analysis and reference.  
v. Reporting: Provides functionality for generating reports and statistics based on the fall -
related data. Healthcare professionals can utilize this feature to gain insights and make 
informed decisions.  
4. External Systems: These represent external entities or systems that interact with the Parkinson's 
fall detection system. For example:  
i. Mobile Applications: Mobile apps can be used by caregivers to receive alerts and view the 
status of Parkinson's patients. These apps may also provide additional features such as 
communication with healthcare professionals and access to historical data.  
ii. Electronic Health Record (EHR) Systems: Integration with existing healthcare systems 
allows healthcare professionals to acces s patient data and synchronize the fall detection . 
 
Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     35 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   4.2.1.4  Sequence Diagram  
 
Figure 4.2.1.4 (a) Sequence diagram of IO T Model.  
User Interaction:  
The sequence diagram starts with the use r interacting with a wearable IO T device, such as a 
smartwatch or a sensor -embedded garment. The user may trigger an action or simply wear 
the device, initiating the monitoring process.  
Sensor Data Collection:  
The wearable IoT device collects sensor data related to the user's movements, such as 
accelerometer and gyroscope readings. The device continuously captures and transmits this 
data to the central system for analysis.  
Data Transmission:  
The wearable IoT device transmits the collected sensor data to the cloud or a central server 
for processing and analysis. This transmi ssion typically occurs through wireless 
communication protocols, such as Wi -Fi or Bluetooth.  
Data Preprocessing:  
The central system receives the transmitted sensor data and performs preprocessing tasks, 
such as filtering noise, normalizing values, or segme nting data into time intervals.  
 
 

Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     36 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   Fall Detection Algorithm:  
The preprocessed sensor data is then fed into a machine learning algorithm designed to detect 
fall incidents.  This algorithm analyzes the patterns and characteristics of the data to determine 
if a fall event has occurred.  
Fall Detection Result:  
Based on the analysis, the fall detection algorithm produces a result indicating whether a fall 
has been detected or not. If a fall is detected, the system proceeds to the next steps for 
appropriate actions.  
Alert Generation:  
In case of a fall detection, the system generates an alert or notification to inform the relevant 
parties, such as caregivers, family members, or emergency services. This alert may be sent 
through various means, including mobile notifications, emails, or phone calls.  
Emergency Response:  
Upon receiving the alert, the appropriate entities, such as emergency services or caregivers, 
initiate the necessary response actions. These actions may involve contacting the user, 
dispatching me dical assistance, or notifying designated contacts.  
 
Figure 4.2.1.4(b) Sequence diagram of ML Model.  
 
 
 

Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     37 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   ● The user will give dataset as input to the system.  
● The system will store the dataset given by the user in its database.  
● The system will do pre -processing of the data stored.  
●  The model is built using various ML algorithms and trained using preprocessed data.  
● The model is evaluated and the algorithm with best accuracy is finalized.  
● The finalized model will predict the res ults. 
Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     38 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   CHAPTER 5  
        IMPLEMENTATION  
 
5.1 Introduction  
The implementation of a Parkinson' s fall detection system using IO T (Internet of Things) 
technology aims to address the safety concerns and challenges faced by individuals with 
Parkinson's disease.  The Parkinson's f all detection system utilizes IO T devices and sensors 
to monitor and detect falls in real -time. By deploying various sensors, the system can collect 
data on movement, posture, and o ther relevant parameters. This data is then analyzed and 
processed using algorithms to identify instances of falls and distinguish them from other 
activities like sitting or lying down.  
 
5.2 Implementation  
Since the IO T in medical devices has become more popu lar, many wearable sensors have 
been developed for fall detection systems. But nowadays the sensors that fuel the IoT are 
getting cheaper, smaller, and have higher performances. Therefore, these developments bring 
more possibilities to help caregivers prot ect their elder by improving on the wearable sensor 
using ADXL337 and NodeMCU -ESP32 for elderly fall detection system This proposed 
system has two main parts, the sensor board, and the monitoring system The sensor board 
consists of Microcontroller (ESP32),  Tilt sensor, Buzzer, OLED, Max30100, Bmp180, 
Accelerometer sensor (ADXL337), Global Positioning System (GPS) neo6m. The main 
component of this system is the accelerometer sensor (ADXL337). ESP32 microcontroller is 
used which consists of an inbuilt Wi -Fi. 
 
Generally, the proposed system consists of three main parts which are the sensor board and 
monitoring system. The first main part is the sensor board or fall detection device. It consists 
of a triaxial accelerometer and the NodeMCU -ESP32. It is used to de tect the kinematics signal 
from the daily living of the elderly. Consequently, the NodeMCU -ESP32 acts as a coordinator 
to send the kinematics signal detected from the ADXL337 to Firebase Cloud.  Moreover, the 
NodeMCU -ESP32 acts as a microcontroller to calcu late the fall detection result with risk level 
Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     39 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   measurement by comparing it with the threshold values. Further, the NodeMCU -ESP32 is a 
product designed for the IoT and embedded systems. The low cost, low power, and 
capabilities of Wi -Fi and Bluetooth are th e main factors for selecting this device for the 
proposed prototype.  
 
5.3 Overview of System Implementation  
The Parkinson's fall detection system utilizing IoT and ML involves wearable sensors that 
capture motion data from individuals with Parkinson's disease.  This data is processed and 
transmitted to an IoT gateway, which securely sends it to a cloud platform. In the cloud, 
machine learning models analyze the data in real -time, detecting fall events by comparing 
sensor data with predefined patterns. Alerts are  generated and sent to caregivers or 
healthcare professionals through a mobile or web application. The system provides insights 
into long -term movement patterns and can be integrated with existing healthcare systems 
for scalability and improved care manage ment.  
 
5.3.1 System Implementation  
1. Hardware Components:  
i. Wearable Sensors: The system utilizes wearable sensors, such as accelerometers and 
gyroscopes, to collect motion data from the user. These sensors are typically 
embedded in devices like smartwatches or specialized wearable devices.  
ii. IOT Gateway: An IO T gateway acts as a bridge between the wearable sensors and 
the cloud platform. It collects the sensor data and transmits it securely to the cloud 
for further processing.  
2. Data Collection and Transmission:  
i. Sensor Data Acquisition: The wearable sensors continuously capture motion data 
from the user's movements. This data includes acceleration, orientation, and angular 
velocity information.  
ii. Preprocessing and Filtering: The raw sensor data may contain noise or irrelevant 
information. Preprocessing techniques, such as noise filtering and feature extraction, 
Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     40 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   are applied to clean and extract relevant features from the data.  
iii. Data Transmission: The filtered and processed data is sent to the IoT gateway through 
wireless communication protocols like Bluetooth or Wi -Fi. The gateway securely 
transmits the data to the cloud platform.  
iv. Dataset features:  
a) MDVP:Fo(Hz) - Average vocal fundamental frequency  
b) MDVP:Fhi(Hz) - Maximum vocal fundamental frequency  
c) MDVP:Flo(Hz) - Minimum vocal fundamental frequency  
d) MDVP:Jitter(%),MDVP:Jitter(Abs),MDVP:RAP,MDVP:PPQ,Jitter:DDP - 
Several measures of variation in fundamental frequency  
e) MDVP:Shimmer,MDVP:Shimmer(dB),Shimmer:APQ3,Shimmer:APQ5,MD
VP:APQ,Shimmer:DDA - Several measures of vari ation in amplitude  
f) NHR,HNR - Two measures of ratio of noise to tonal components in the voice  
g) status - Health status of the subject (one) - Parkinson's, (zero) - healthy  
h) RPDE,D2 - Two nonlinear dynamical complexity measures  
i) DFA - Signal fractal scaling expo nent 
j) spread1,spread2,PPE - Three nonlinear measures of fundamental frequency 
variation  
3. Cloud Platform:  
i. Data Storage: The cloud platform receives and stores the sensor data in a database for 
further analysis and long -term storage.  
ii. Machine Learning Models: ML models are developed and deployed on the cloud 
platform to analyze the collected data. These models are trained to recognize patterns 
and detect falls based on the sensor data.  
iii. Real-time Analysis: The ML models process the incoming data in real -time to identify 
fall events. They can distinguish between normal activities and fall -related movements 
by comparing the sensor data with predefined fall patterns.  
iv. Alert Generation: When a fall event is detected, the system generates alerts or 
notifications, which  can be sent to caregivers, healthcare professionals, or emergency 
Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     41 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   services, depending on the severity of the situation.  
4. User Interface and Monitoring:  
i. Mobile or Web Application: The system provides a user interface through a mobile or 
web application. Users, caregivers, or healthcare professionals can access the 
application to monitor the user's activities and receive fall notifications.  
ii. Historical Data Analysis: The system can also provide insights into the user's overall 
movement patterns and fall occ urrences over time. This information can be used for 
long-term monitoring and analysis of the user's condition.  
5. Integration:  
i. Integration with Existing Systems: The fall detection system can be integrated with 
existing healthcare systems, electronic health records (EHR), or remote patient 
monitoring platforms to enhance the overall care management process . 
 
 
5.3.1.1  Programming Language s  
i. C  
The C programming language is widely used in IoT (Internet of Things) development due 
to its efficiency, low -level control, and compatibility with various hardware platforms. C 
provides direct access to memory, allowing developers to optimize code for resource -
constrained IoT devices.C is often used to write firmware for embedded systems and 
microcontrollers. These small comput ing devices, found in IoT devices, require 
lightweight and efficient code to operate with limited resources such as memory and 
processing power. C's low -level control allows developers to directly manipulate 
hardware registers and efficiently utilize syste m resources, making it well -suited for these 
resource -constrained environments. C provides a wide range of libraries and APIs 
(Application Programming Interfaces) that facilitate communication protocols commonly 
used in IoT, such as MQTT (Message Queuing T elemetry Transport) or CoAP 
(Constrained Application Protocol). These libraries enable developers to establish 
connections, exchange data, and interact with IoT platforms, cloud services, or other 
devices on the network.  
 
Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     42 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   ii. Python  
Python is a widely used programming language in the field of Machine Learning (ML) 
due to its versatility, simplicity, and rich ecosystem of libraries and frameworks. Python 
provides a conducive environment for ML tasks, offering a balance between ease o f use 
and powerful capabil ities.  
Python's ML ecosystem also includes popular deep learning frameworks like Tensor flow,  
keras  and scikit-learn  . These frameworks offer high -level abstractions and APIs for 
building and training deep neural networks, enabling complex tasks like image 
recognition, natural language processing, and sequence modeling. They provide efficient 
computation on both CPUs and GPUs, allowing for scalable and accelerated ML model 
training.  
 
5.3.2 Libraries Used  
i. Flask : Flask is a popular web framework for building web app lications in Python. It 
provides a lightweight and flexible way to create web services and APIs. One of the 
essential features of Flask is its ability to handle HTTP requests and responses 
efficiently.  
ii. Flask_restful:  It extends Flask and simplifies the dev elopment of RESTful APIs in 
Python by providing a convenient way to define resources and handle HTTP methods  
iii. Numpy : NumPy is a widely -used Python library for numerical computing that 
provides efficient data structures and functions for working with arrays and matrices, 
enabling high -performance mathematical and scientific computations. It is a 
fundamental tool in data analysis, machine learning, and scientific research . 
iv. Keras. models : The keras.modules library is a part of the Keras deep learning 
framework, which provides a modular and user -friendly interface for building and 
training neural networks. This library offers a collection of high -level neural network 
building blocks called modules, which can be combined to create complex network 
architectures  
 
Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     43 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE    
v. Flask_cors:  The flask_cors library is a Flask extension that simplifies Cross -Origin 
Resource Sharing (CORS) handling in Flask applications. CORS is a security 
mechanism implemented by web browsers to control cross -origin requests, which are 
requests made from a different domain, port, or protocol  
vi. Pickle:  The pickle library in Python provides a convenient way to serialize and 
deserialize Python objects. Serialization refers to the process of converting an object 
into a format that can be stored or transmitt ed, while deserialization is the reverse 
process of reconstructing the object from the serialized form.  
vii. Joblib:  The joblib library in Python provides utilities for efficiently serializing and 
deserializ ing Python objects, especially for objects that contain large amounts of data. 
Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     44 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   CHAPTER 6  
PSEUDO CODE  
1. Data Preparation:  
i. Load the voice dataset containing features extracted from voice recordings . 
ii. Separate the features (X) and corresponding labels (Y) for training and testing . 
2. Feature Scaling:  
i. Apply feature scaling to normalize the input data . 
ii. Common techniques include standardization or normalization.  
3. Model Selection and Training:  
i. Choose a suitable machine learning algorithm for classification, such as Decision  
Tree, Gaussian Naïve Bayes  Support Vector Machines (SVM , Logistic Regression  
and Random Forest . 
ii. Split the data into training and testing sets.  
iii. Train the chosen model using the training data.  
4. Model Evaluation:  
i. Evaluate the trained model's performan ce using appropriate metrics like accuracy, 
precision, recall, or F1 score.  
ii. Use the testing dataset to assess the model's generalization ability.  
5. Hyperparameter Tuning (Optional):  
i. Perform hyperparameter tuning to optimize the model's performance.  
ii. Use techniques like grid search or random search to find the best combination of 
hyperparameters.  
6. Prediction:  
i. Once the model is trained and evaluated, use it to make predictions on new, unseen 
data.  
ii. Preprocess the voice data by extracting the required features.  
Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     45 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   iii. Apply the same feature scaling techniques used during training.  
iv. Feed the preprocessed data to the trained model for prediction.  
7. Interpretation and Reporting:  
i. Analyze the model's predictions and interpret the results.  
ii. The results are compared and best one is picked  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     46 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   CHAPTER 7  
TES TING 
7.1 Test Cases  
1. Normal Activity Test:  
i. Simulate normal daily activities of a person without Parkinson's disease.  
ii. Ensure the system does not trigger false alarms or detect falls durin g regular 
movements, such as walking, sitting, or lying down.  
2. Fall Event Test:  
i. Simulate a fall event by intentionally creating a controlled fall scenario.  
ii. Verify that the system accurately detects the fall and triggers an appropriate alarm 
or alert.  
3. Non-Fall Movement Test:  
i. Perform movements that may mimic falls but are not actual falls, such as sudden 
gestures or quick movements.  
ii. Ensure the system does not mistakenly identify these non -fall movements as falls.  
4. Multiple Persons Test:  
i. Test the system's ability to differentiate between falls of the user with Parkinson's 
disease and falls of other individuals in the vicinity.  
ii. Verify that the system accurately detects falls specific to the user and disregards 
falls of others.  
5. Environmental Varia tion Test:  
i. Introduce variations in the environment, such as changes in lighting conditions or 
background noise levels.  
ii. Evaluate the system's robustness to environmental factors and ensure accurate fall 
detection despite these variations.  
 
 
 
Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     47 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   6. False Negati ve Test:  
i. Intentionally perform falls or simulate fall events that are not detected by the 
system.  
ii. Check the system's sensitivity and identify any instances where falls are mi ssed or 
not detected accurately.  
7. False Positive Test:  
i. Perform normal activities  that may trigger false alarms, such as abrupt movements 
or sudden posture changes.  
ii. Verify that the system maintains a low rate of false alarms and does not 
unnecessarily raise alerts.  
8. Real -World Scenarios Test:  
i. Conduct extensive field tests with individuals having Parkinson's disease in real -
world settings, such as their homes or care facilities.  
ii. Evaluate the system's performance, accuracy, and reliability in detecting falls and 
providing timely alerts.  
9. Emergency Response Test:  
i. Integrate the sy stem with emergency response services or caregivers.  
ii. Validate the system's ability to promptly alert and notify the appropriate parties 
during a fall event.  
10. Long -Term Monitoring Test:  
i. Test the system's stability and performance over an extended period,  such as 
several weeks or months.  
ii. Assess the system's ability to consistently detect falls and maintain accurate 
performance over time.  
11. Test Case: Normal Activity  
i. Description: Simulate normal activities, such as walking, sitting, and lying down.  
ii. Expected Outcome: The system should not detect a fall and remain in the normal 
activity     state.  
Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     48 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   12. Test Case: Simulated Fall Event  
i. Description: Simulate a fall event by triggering the sensors to indicate a sudden 
change in acceleration and orientation.  
ii. Expected Outcome: The system should accurately detect the fall event and trigger 
an alarm or alert.  
13. Test Case: False Positive Detection  
i. Description: Perform activities that may mimic fall -like movements, such as sudden 
bending or quick movements.  
ii. Expe cted Outcome: The system should not incorrectly detect these activities as falls 
and should remain in the normal activity state.  
14. Test Case: Fall Detection Accuracy  
i. Description: Simulate various fall scenarios with different intensities and impact 
force s. 
ii. Expected Outcome: The system should consistently and accurately detect falls of 
varying magnitudes and trigg er appropriate alarms or alerts.  
15. Test Case: Environmental Variations  
i. Description: Test the system's performance under different environmental  conditions, 
such as varying lighting or background noise levels.  
ii. Expected Outcome: The system should maintain accurate fall detection irrespective 
of environmental variations that may impact sensor readings.  
16. Test Case: Network Disconnection and Reconnection  
i. Description: Temporarily disconnect the IoT network and then reconnect it.  
ii. Expected Outcome: The system should handle network disruptions gracefully and 
resume normal operation once the connection is restored.  
17. Test Case: User Interface Int eraction  
i. Description: Interact with the user interface, such as checking real -time fall detection 
status, reviewing historical fall events, and adjusting system settings.  
ii. Expected Outcome: The user interface should provide accurate and up -to-date 
informati on, allow easy navigation, and respond correctly to user interactions.  
Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     49 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE    
18. Test Case: Integration with Emergency Services  
i. Description: Trigger a fall event and verify if the system correctly notifies emergency 
services with relevant information.  
ii. Expected Outcome: The system should effectively communicate with emergency 
services, providing accurate location details and necessary information to facilitate 
timely assistance.  
19. Test Case: User Feedback and Usability Testing  
i. Description: Collect feedback from  users, caregivers, or healthcare professionals 
regarding the system's usability, effectiveness, and any potential improvements.  
ii. Expected Outcome: The system should be intuitive, user -friendly, and meet the needs 
and expectations of the intended users.  
 
These test cases cover various aspects of the Parkinson's fall detection system, including 
accurate fall detection, handling false positives, robustness under different conditions, user 
interface functionality, integration with emergency services, and overal l usability. 
Conducting comprehensive testing helps ensure the system's reliability, accuracy, and 
effectiveness in real -world scenarios.  
 
Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     50 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE    
CHAPTER 8  
RESULTS  
 
 
Figure 8.1 Parkinson Belt  
 
 
Figure 8.2 Display from Firebase Cloud  

Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     51 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE    
 
Figure 8.3 Display from MIT Application Screen  
 

Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     52 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE    
 
Figure 8.4 Decision Tree Accuracy  
 
 
 
Figure 8.5 XG Boost  Accuracy  
 

Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     53 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE    
 
Figure 8.6 Logistic Regression  Accuracy  
 
 
 
Figure 8.7 SVM Accuracy  
 

Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     54 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE    
 
Figure 8.8 Guas sian Naïve Bayes  Accuracy  
 
 
 
Figure 8.9 Random Forest Accuracy  

Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     55 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE    
 
 
Figure 8.10 Accuracy Comparis on of the Algorithms  
 
 
 
Figure 8.11 User Front End UI

Parkinson’s Fall Detection Using Machine Learning and IOT  
 
     56 | Dept. of ISE, DSCE   CHAPTER 9  
           CONCLUSION AND FUTURE SCOPE  
 
The main aim of our project was to develop an intelligent device for detecting falls using 
the IoT pattern of Parkinson’s patients and we achieved that using this proposed system. 
The different directions of patients were detected using an accelerometer sensor 
(ADXL335) a nd ESP32 provides real -time monitoring of the Firebase cloud. The model 
was tested with sensor values from different scenarios and for different patients. A better 
accurate model is selected for the prediction of falls. Our system has around 82.5% 
precisio n and 95% of specification compared to other existing systems.  
 
The data uploaded to the Firebase server can be used for medical research. The real -time 
location update of patients and the direction of fall is the most important facility of our 
system whic h helps caretakers and family to reach the patients immediately. We are 
planning to test our system with more patients to compare the values for better prediction.  
The prototype of the proposed system was implemented using low -cost devices, but 
provide hig h quality and performance as the high -cost devices. The developers have used 
GY-85 and NodeMCUESP32 with the real -time monitoring in the Firebase cloud for this 
purpose. According to the results of testing, as shown in Table 1, the testing results indicate  
that the proposed system has an accuracy of around 82.50 percent and a specificity of up 
to 99.99 percent regarding the improvement in signal processing and accuracy in term of 
analyzing the real accidental fall events from activities of daily living to r educe false 
alarms.  
 
WFDS can distinguish between falls and ADLs with high accuracy in real time and without 
any false alarm. The optimization of the accuracy measurements is based on the proposed 
accurate algorithm DFE. Consequently, the proposed fall det ection algorithm achieved 
100% accuracy, 100% sensitivity, and 100% specificity. The proposed WFDS 
outperformed methods proposed by other studies in terms of accurac y and specificity . 
